A big thank you to
our sponsors because they make
the show possible. And I
hope that you support them
the way they support us
progress. Software is the creator
of the most comprehensive developer
toolkit for building modern apps
on the market. Today Tellerik
dev craft with more than
1100 telerik.net and Kendo, UI
JavaScript components and controls. You
can easily build modern high-performance
web mobile and desktop apps,
as well as chatbots. The
tools that also includes reporting
solutions, automated testing, and productivity
tools, and comes with a
range of support options. New
this year is a free
online trading program for all
license holders. With this alongside
thousands of demos and source
code available, comprehensive documentation and
a full assortment of visual
studio templates, you'll be up
and running with the progress
Tellerik and Kendo UI controls
in no time. Download a
free 30 day trial today
at tellerik.com/hanselman that's T L
E R I k.com/hanselman .
Hi, this is Scott Hanselman.
This is another episode of
Hansel minutes today. I'm talking
with dr. Hannah. Oh, Dasher.
She's a PhD in cognitive
neuroscience and a data scientist
working at Microsoft on something
that was just so exciting.
I wanted to have you
on the show. I'm doing
well. Hi Scott. Nice to
meet you. I'm super excited
to be here. Yeah, this
is going to be great.
So I learned recently about
this idea of play fab,
PLA Y F a B
it's a game back end
as a service. So this
is a, this is amazing.
Like if I make a
game, I know I have
to like set up like
sign in and maybe, maybe
I can do a, a
top 10 leaderboard, but I
you're telling me I'm going
to spend a lot of
time, like making the backend
when I really just want
to make the game. Right.
Yeah. So PlayFab provides a
complete cloud base backend as
a service for games. So
like, if you think like
traditionally how games were used
to just sold and operate,
you know, like you would
just go to a store
and buy like a game
and that the content never
changes. And you know, like
you were kind of like
playing a stationary game that
over and over again. Right.
And, but now more and
more games are actually being
operated services and you can
even consider games as an
ongoing conversation with customers. So
for example, games can launch
live events and send out
push notifications, or even react
to certain player actions in
real time. And this is
not uncommon, right? You download
mobile games and most games
nowadays duty stinks. And on
the other end of the
spectrum, sometimes game sank crash,
which used to be the
end of the game life
cycle. But now they can
actually quickly roll back without
really affecting much of their
player base. And we're getting
updates constantly. Like on my
phone, I might see a
game update once a month
or even once a week.
Yeah. And you know, like
it's, the backend services actually
are not visible, but all
of these, like try to
operate your game active requires
extensive backend infrastructure, such as,
you know, CRM, marketing automation,
content, automation, commerce system, customer
support, big data analytics and
localization tools along with all
the other end game features
such as leaderboards and matchmaking.
And, you know, to effectively
operate a game, it's not
just about building these tools
independently, but all of these
tools need to talk to
each other. That seems like
it's like as a game
developer, the least interesting part
of it, but it's also
going to be like the
base of this pyramid or
the underneath of a giant
iceberg. Like I'll spend 20%
of the game, but I'm
really gonna need a lot
of work if I want
to succeed. And ideally the
customer will never see it.
They'll just have a great
experience with a backend that
they'll never know exists. Right?
Yeah. So Plato operates is
like backend services, specialized for
games offering, you know, extensive
cloud based tools and covering
all the things that I
mentioned just now, like all
platforms like PC mobile, Xbox
PlayStation, or Nintendo, you name
it. And it is a
very cost effective way to,
to start launching and operating
your games and, you know,
enable developers can so that
they can focus on making
their games fun better than
focusing on stressing out about
building their backend in front.
So how much do you
think that most game developers
are spending on the front
end versus the back end
these days? Well, I'll, don't
have the exact answer, but
you know, typically game developers
used to spend like years
in making games and upon
release their job was considered
done. But nowadays we see
some of our customers spending
maybe as little as eight
weeks building a game, and
then many years of fixing,
improving and operating their game.
So many successful games today
spend as much time and
effort operating their live game
as they did to bring
it to the market. Interesting.
And they have to keep
that game up and keep
it running 24 seven. They
have to babysit the game
and make sure that it's
like, there's dev ops now
for games. Right, Right, right.
Right. So yes, a lot
of mobile developers, especially like
indie studios, like we see
them like launching a very
MVP and lean version of
the games first and then
sort of like improving as
their customer base increases and,
you know, getting their feedback
and, you know, just, just
continuously operating and improving and,
and make sure that they're
actually kind of like going
to a more like flip
fledged product than sort of
like staying at that MVP
stage. Now you have a,
a PhD in cognitive neuroscience.
Is that like how the
brain works? Yeah. So I
actually spent about 10 years
sort of like studying how
people operate, like kind of
ranging from, you know, vegan
kind of looking into how
people perceive motion and depth,
like using like a very
sort of like initial version
of BR goggles. And then
my PhD work was more
related to sort of like,
how, how do people make
decisions? How do people learn
from the environment? So I
actually sort of like studied
how people do reinforcement learning,
not the machines do reinforcement
learning, you know? Hmm. Now
is reinforcement learning. That's something
certainly where I can go
and learn a topic and
I can understand what the
best way to teach something
is, but can that be
then applied to like making
an online game better and
making someone happier when they're
doing something that isn't necessarily
learning? Well, it's sort of
like an kind of like
optimal, like you could actually
certainly use it to optimize
the, your machine basically. So
the whole, whole theory behind
reinforcement learning is that like
the, the, you know, the
information in our, our environment
is kind of probabilistic, meaning
that we don't necessarily get
a very stationary conclusions based
on the decision that we
make every day. Even like,
imagine you're sort of like
driving your car, trying to
merge into a very busy
highway and you actually have
to have a lot of
info information to actually emerge
without crashing into another car.
And humans do this like
really fast. I'm fairly easily.
If you're like a pretty
advanced driver and machines actually
tend to fail a lot
if, and given a same
situation. So it's certainly sort
of like interesting kind of
like how people sort of
like launched their experience, optimized
their decision, making skills, and
then apply it in a
real world situation. Hmm. So
reinforcement learning is how it's
also how people learn, but
it's also how computers learn,
like in the machine learning
context. Oh, you have to,
you have to run an
agent through a process and
then hopefully they'll change their
state based on some rewards
that they're given by their
scenario. Right? Yeah. So the
reward is like the very
sort of like a signal
that actually makes machines to
learn and optimize those skills
or sort of like value,
which information is more important
in driving car, better decisions
over the other, I guess.
Now if we plot, if
we apply that to, to,
to a game or to
a piece of software, is
that enabling the, the user
then to achieve their goal
more, have more fun while
they're doing it than anything,
you know, they open their,
whatever it is, their loot
box or their next, their
next achievement in the game.
And then the cycle continues.
Yeah. Certainly it's sort of
like, you can actually kind
of use that, like use
that algorithm to sort of
like make the games more
fun and make the experience
more engaging for users. So
if we're, if someone's listening
to this show and maybe
they've thought about making a
game or in the past,
they've, they've already made a
game of put one out
there. They might be thinking,
wow, this is an awful
lot of science. And, and,
and PhD's to, to just,
I just want to make
a fun game, but this
is proven to make games
better, right? Like you, you
are making games more fun
and making people stick around
and play them longer. When
you think about science in
this way. Right? The whole
goal of data scientists, especially
on gaming is to make
games were fun, you know,
with the goal of improving
acquisition, engagement and retention of
the player of your playbook
player base. So basically, I
mean like a lot of
people think that data science
is like, you know, just
kinda collecting and tracking some
well-known metrics, such as, you
know, number of new installs,
monthly, daily, active users, their
retention game revenue, or even
crush rates that can actually
help developers to track performance
after games. But it's not
really limited to that. I
mean, if you have a
really good set of data
scientist, you can do way
more interesting things with, with
the resources. That's a really
good point. So you are
a data science with a
particular background. Yours is in
cognitive neuroscience. You're not just
going to sit there and
say, Oh, look, we have
a, this many percent retention
rate. If we change this,
we'll retain more. Right. You
can go far beyond that
and understand why people do
what they do and push
them forward in the game.
Yeah. I mean, if you
think about it, there are
so many different reasons. Play
people play games. I mean,
some people seek new experience.
Some people play to socialize
with others and some people
just simply play to kill
time. And, you know, modern
games like the player base
is also kind of like
coming from many different parts
of the world. And they
may come from very diverse
cultural backgrounds and they may
also be comprised of wide
range of age groups. And
as you can imagine, like
player behavior differs widely across
diverse groups and you can
certainly use data science to
identify like does different player
groups characterize how different or
similar they are in their
activity patterns and detect which
part of the game players
are most engaged or even
at which point players often
struggle and likely decide to
quit playing the games. And
all of these is just
to sort of like improving
the quality of the product
as well as sort of
like games from the player
side game, making gameplay experience
more fun and engaging. Hmm.
So when we think about
how a person engages with
a game, you're sending whatever
telemetry you as the game
developer chooses to, to the
back end in this case,
it might be PlayFab. So
it could be, you know,
user entered a new area,
user did something in their
inventory. It's really up to
you as the game developer
decide what you want to
capture in order to make
the decision about what later
will be chewed up as
a, as data and the
data science side. Right? So,
I mean like game developers
know dare games the best,
right? So data scientists can
certainly work with developers to
actually let's say like, okay,
these are the good telemetry
events that you need to
implement in the game to
measure, you know, like where
players are most engaged or
where they're failing, or whether
the tutorials very helpful or
not, you know, things like
that. And then become work
with the developers to tune
their games with the optimal
parameters, to provide more tailored
experience for disperse player groups
or even for an individual
player. Hmm. So when this
gets pulled into the PlayFab
backend, the game back end
as a service, then we,
we, as the, the dev
ops, people in the game
can, can chew that data,
look at that data and
then apply whatever we want
to, to, to confirm or
deny our assumptions about how
people move around the game.
That's our goal. So we
are still at an early
stage and we are sort
of like trying to help
developers to make these telemetrics
decisions better, help, help them
to better interpret their data.
And we can also try
to optimize the, our backend
system to easily push out
different contents, different store offerings,
or even different gameplay experience
based on what we found
in the data I see.
And because the game front
end can be changed and
the back end is always
being improved. We might be
able to discover things farther
along in the process that
may not exist today. Right.
And then, you know, again,
to Rose can make changes
to their games, update or
contents, and which refer to
as live ops. And it's
like providing customized experience for
each player so that they
can continue to engage. The,
the idea of real time
is really interesting because we're
not just chewing on data
from like last week and
all the sessions last week.
You can literally say, you
know, the people in India
are waking up right now
and they're starting to enter
the game. So now, because
of the time of day,
you know, we're really hot
in this time zone and
those people are coming in
and that, like you said
before, they might be treating
the game differently than someone
in another country. And we
can give them a better
experience. Yeah. I mean, for
example, I mean, since it's
October, let's imagine that you
are running, trying to run
a Halloween event, right? Like
introducing special themes on items
in the game. And you
see so many games do
this nowadays, right? And so
it might be a really
good idea to launch the
event. Only the countries just
celebrate Halloween like the U
S and you can also
try to widely announce events
and you might want to
send out a push or
email notification to players in
this countries. And you can't
even offer like special Halloween
discounts only to a group
of your most, you know,
Royal players. Who's been active
in your game for a
long period of time, or
have spent a large amount
of money in your game.
And then to go one
step further to make things
more interesting. You can also
set some limited time achievements.
So for example, collecting a
rare set of items to
unlock a hidden level or
special rewards, or have a
realtime leaderboards that show progress
amongst a group of friends.
Hmm. I never even thought
it's such an obvious thing
to say now that you've
said it, but the idea
that I would not want
to do a worldwide Halloween
push, if a country doesn't
celebrate it or doesn't even
care, Right. It's not going
to be relevant for their
experience, right? Like you might
want to target different types
of events for the countries
that are not in that
group of countries. You know?
I see. So then we
were segmenting our different player
groups. They're all getting a
different experience. And this is
part of that concept that
you refer to called live
ops. Yeah. And there's code
for all of this. Like
I noticed when I went
up to get hub that
they had to get hub
for PlayFab, there's a game
like a full game called
unicorn battle that like has
examples of how to do
this kind of stuff. Yeah.
I mean, the unicorn battle
is like, sort of like
already example game kind of
showing off our, you know,
capabilities using our PlayFab backend.
And you can do really
interesting things. You can push
out like a new store
offerings your two year, like
to your specified segments in
a real time or change
the content, you know, or
even like update like player
status just in real time,
just using a few simple
button clicks. So there's like,
there's end game promotions that
we talked about. And there's
like, you know, cross promoting,
if someone did something and
you want to let them
know about something else that's
going on, but also the
obvious things like leaderboards, but
messaging and DLC as well.
Right? So like live off
strategies is just a collection
of strategists for, for games
to continue to connect and
develop deep relationships with players
for the long haul and
all that, the goal that
improved acquisition engagement and retention.
And we see all the
time that at an effective
live of strategy can make
the difference between success and
failure for a modern game.
And, you know, sometimes it
can even turn games into
forever franchises. Yeah. That's an
interesting thing. There are games
that I have had for
years that you would think
would not be fresh anymore,
but they are changing. They
are growing and they are
different. So I keep coming
back to them. So it's
like a new challenge, new,
new content update and, you
know, new events. Those are
all sort of like very
helpful in acquiring your players
and as well as like
providing new content and interesting
challenges to existing players, Today's
episode was sponsored by Accu
soft since 1991, Accu soft
has offered a robust portfolio
of content processing and conversion
solutions built for developers by
developers. The offerings include high
performance document capture forms, processing,
viewing, search compression, conversion, barcode
recognition, OCR ICR, N M
I C R. You can
visit Accu soft.com/hansel minutes to
try out the solutions for
yourself. The first 40 people
to visit the site and
register for a demo will
get a free Accu soft
t-shirt that's Accu soft, a
CCU soft.com/hansel minutes. Now all
of this, from my perspective,
as the consumer is I
want to be happy and
enjoy myself. And then from
the point of view of
the game maker, they want
their people to be happy,
but they also want them
to remain players. They want
them to be, to be
satisfied. And I was reading
your, your PhD thesis. And
I saw a word I
did not recognize called satisficing.
Right? What is that? That,
that's an awesome word. I
know it's a portmanteau of
something. What does satisficing, It's
a sort of like a
made up world word, like
a proposed by Herbert Simon
who actually won a Nobel
prize in economics back in
1980s or something. And it's
sort of like a merge
of two different words, satisfied
plus suffice. So people are,
are like in the real
world, like it's actually really,
really difficult to make an
optimal decision. And I'm not
even sure if there's such
thing as optimal decision given
the sort of like unknown
uncertainties and probabilities of the
information. So it's sort of
like a word that used
to describe how people make
decisions based on heuristics. So
people tend to make decisions
that's kind of good enough
or so five to satisfy
their, their threshold. Okay. So
they're not necessarily making optimal
but decisions, but they are
making reasonable decisions that meet
a certain bar or level
of quality they suffice. Yes.
And that's, that's what enables
sort of like a quick
decision, you know, like if
you go to walk into
a grocery store and you're
attracted, pick up a peanut
butter, there are so many
different peanut butter brands and,
you know, like there petition
differently, their labels are different.
And how do you know
whether you actually pick the
optimal peanut butter for yourself?
Yeah. Okay. So I'm applying
this to games. I know
that very often I'll be
running through a dungeon and
I'll get a new sword
or a new shield and
I'll go, Oh, I don't
have enough information to decide
if this is the right
one or the best one,
but I just want the
best one. And then I'm
forced to make some, what
I feel is suboptimal decision.
And then I have to
run forward with a, you
know, some sort of made
of paper. I'm not sure
if it's the right one.
Yeah. But interesting thing is
like, humans are actually extremely
good at making this type
of heuristic decisions that are
close to optimal, which is
kind of surprising. Interesting. So
how is this different from
making a decision based on
your gut? It's very similar
idea, actually. So people often
describe it just as a
gut decision making as well.
So when I was doing
my PhD, I was also
looking into brain activities involved
in this type of decisions
versus something that was actually
overlearned and odd and sort
of like making optimal decisions.
And, you know, like this
type of heuristic decision making
actually takes very little time
and also involves less of
prefrontal cortex, which is known
to be involved in making
more logical reasoning and sort
of like more information based
decisions. Okay. So if I'm
making a gut decision or
if I feel like my,
you know, my chest rather
than the front of my
head is helping me make
the decision, what part of
the brain is lit up
or is it even being
used to make those decisions?
So it's the part of
the brain that I found
was called striatum. It's actually,
I'm heavily involved in reinforcement
learning as well. So if
you're sort of like learning
through experience and then you're
kind of like making the
choice without really kind of
logically going through what reasoning
steps that you're taking, then
just part of the brain
actually lights up pretty intensely.
And this is also very
heavily, like very closely to
model reactions as well. So
it actually triggers faster motor
response. Interesting. That makes me
feel like if I was
playing a very twitchy game,
then that would be the
brain that would be involved
in making those quick decisions
where I don't even feel
like I'm making a decision,
but I probably am. Right.
Like first person shooter game.
It's like all about motor
reactions. Right. You're not actually
kind of going thinking through,
Oh, like saying like, Oh,
I detected an enemy right
there and I'm going to
use this machine to optimally
kill that person. Okay. So
in the game of course
indicate. Yeah. Interesting. Okay. So,
but there are, there are,
there are things that exist.
There are theories and frameworks
around like how people move
through the world and there's
theories like, like rational choice
theory that propose that users
have a certain preference and
they can make an basically
an educated decision. How does
sufficing relate to the theory
that you can make decisions
with appropriate information and have
an opinion? Well, I mean,
our brain stores so much
data and we have abundance
of memory from built from
infancy to childhood to, to
up until adulthood. Right? So
we have this abundance of
information that actually pre-trained us
to, you know, make decisions
that are fairly rational and
we develop preference. And if
you are actually sort of
like making a very simple
choices, like, I don't know,
simple choice cookies, cookies, right.
You have a clear preference.
If you're kinda like given
a choice between chocolate chip
cookie versus potato chips, you
probably have pretty good, good,
you know, like preference to
which one you like. So
that's, to your standpoint, that's
probably a rational choice to
make. And that's fairly easy
choice to make because you
already have a clear preference,
but if you are sort
of like, if you actually
joined, you know, a new
workspace or like you got
a new job, like people
sort of like, don't know
how to act or for
a couple of days, you
know, like don't know how
to interact well. Or when
I first joined Microsoft, I
was having so much trouble,
you know, just kind of
like adapting to using outlook.
You know, I didn't know
how to book a meeting
room and that, those, those
things, you know, like I
learned very fast, but like,
you know, it's, it's, it's,
it's a steep learning curve.
It is, it is, there's
a, this, this is a
little bit random, but there's
a show. One of my
favorite TV shows is called
the good place. And I
don't know if you've ever
seen it before. Okay. You
know how cheaty on the
good place has troubles with
decisions. And there was an
episode last week where he
was trying to decide if
he wanted a blueberry muffin
or another kind of muffin.
And he finally came up
with it. I can, man,
I'm gonna have a blueberry
muffin. And then he learned
that the farmers that made
the blueberries were like oppressed
and he received way more
information than he needed. And
he no longer could make
an optimal decision. And he
was choosing to make optimal
decisions rather than trying to
make satisfactory ones. And it
ultimately kind of destroyed him.
He was unable to make
any decision at all. Yeah.
Cause we are constantly surrounded
by uncertainties of the world.
Like there's no guarantee that
like the today's blueberry method,
we will guarantee the quality
of tomorrow's blueberry muffin. Yeah.
And any, any cereal that
you eat today will probably
cause cancer in rats tomorrow.
Yeah, baby. Yeah. Okay. So
people are trying to evaluate
like all the available information,
both subconsciously and consciously, and
they're using different parts of
their brains to make decisions.
And if we apply what
we know about how people
move through life, we can
presume that they'll move similar
leads through the game. And
I assume we can make
even like AB tests or
test these theories as people
move through our games to
see if we offer them
something, they'll be excited about
it or they'll shun it.
Yeah. I mean like that's
the sort of like the,
the critical thing about having
live ops strategy. So like
it's not just about like
running a live ops events,
it's more critical to assess
the effect of the strategy
after the event, you know?
So you want to evaluate
like what percentage of players
actually engage or like, was
it effective in attracting new
players? Did it bring back
lapse players or was it
growth helpful in growing revenue?
All these questions are interesting
and it's sort of like
a, you know, it's an
iterative process of sort of
like forming your optimal strategy
in some sense. And in
your paper, in your thesis,
you talk about decision making
in small worlds, in large
worlds. And in the real
world, I assume a game
as a small world Game
is a small world, depending
on how developers choose to
design it. So if it's,
if it's super Mario, for
example, like Mar like you
probably know the consequence of
like hitting the brake or
like, you know, getting hit
by the floor and stuff
like that. But I mean,
some developers actually choose to
make their games somewhat probabilistic.
So like the same game
action does not really result
in the same game reaction.
And that is actually sort
of like more of a
large world scenario. Oh, okay.
So a massively multiplayer game
or a game that is
persistent or lives, lives forever
with thousands or millions of
people in it is going
to be in fact, a
large world and feel much
different. Yeah. Interesting. Interesting. So
then to, how much time
do you think people should
put into understanding these things
are running these experiments as
they try to make their
game successful? I mean, for
running experiments, there's certainly set
to school theories that actually
measures, you know, a number
of sample sizes, how long
the experiment should run and
stuff like that. But I
mean, this is an iterative
process, as long as it's
the games alive, then, I
mean, this is the data
science should be involved all
the time. So you should
always be having experiments and
always be trying to learn
more about how your players
play your game and how
they enjoy your game. Right.
Yeah. So it's just kinda
like going back to the
live ops theory that, you
know, it's just about continuously
improving your product so that
it stays relevant. And you
said that this is just
kind of getting started at
PlayFab is just going to
be integrating itself into the
Microsoft ecosystem. Is this something
people can sign up for
and learn about now? Are
people people are using this
now today, right? Yes. I
mean, we have thousands of
developers who are already using
PlayFab and you can simply
try it out@playfab.com by signing
up and it's free, it's
free service until you reach
thousand Mau and yeah. So
feel free to try it
out. And You just said
a thousand mile Thousand monthly
active player is sort of
like our, our business model
of saying, okay, you are,
your game has significant users.
So it may be, you
might consider paying it. I
see. So that's Mau, mult,
you know, Mao is what
active users, users, monthly active
users. So if I make
a niche game or I'm
getting started testing my game
or trying it out, it
is free. And then at
some point when I hit
the limit, I should consider,
consider paying. And there's a
free guide as well. It's
like a whole document that
is you can download the
PDF. That explains what live
ops is and how that
strategy can, can help your
game succeed. Yes. It's on
our website. It's called guy
to live offs. Yeah. And
it's, it's free to download
and if you're interested, you
can check it, check it
out and see and learn
about live boss event. Hmm.
And this plugs into any
engine, right? Like I'm a.net
developer. So I use unity
and I can make Xbox
games or whatever PlayFab works
anywhere basically on any engine.
Yeah, exactly. So I can
use it on a phone
as well. And you have
people doing that as well.
Yeah. You can change like
game settings on your phone.
We have a backend UI
that actually enables you to
just update the contents using
any web browser. So yeah,
it's fairly easy to use.
Cool. So there's SDKs for
every platform and it's free
until we get really big
and I can check it
out@playfab.com. Okay. Yeah. Everything's free.
And you're first sign up.
So yeah. Please check out
playfab.com and sign up and
make a new account and
you can start plugging in
your new, your new game
into play. Fantastic. Well, thank
you so much, dr. Hannah.
Oh, deShar for chatting with
me today. Thank you, Scott.
For inviting me. This has
been another episode of Hanselminutes
and we'll see you again
next week.